# Dendrochronology Educational Internet Resource Project Proposal

## 1. Audience

  - Anyone seeking background information about dendrochronology, anywhere on
    the Internet.

  - Journalists and other re-publishers of information.

It might be surprising not to include dendrochronologists as part of the target
audience for a dendrochronological Internet resource, but this would not be an
attempt to duplicate the work of academic journals, and timely announcements of
conferences or publications would be better distributed in other ways. The aim
would be restricted: only to provide educational resources to a broad general
audience, but to do this well. Of course there would be nothing to prevent
dendrochronologists being among the re-publishers of information â€” using the
resources in their own lectures or publicity information, for example. On the
other hand a broad geographical scope would be important, not limited to any one
country or continent.

## 2. Content

- Short illustrated articles.

- Image galleries.

- Audio-visual media clips.

The suggested types of content are not particularly exciting for 2018 (they
might not even have been exciting ten years ago!), but this is a deliberate
choice to start with something that the site maintainers can manage, and
encourage re-use in different contexts. Ideally the articles would make sense in
isolation, but also be organized to cover the entire background of
dendrochronology. They would not reflect the latest breaking news in the field,
but would be updated if they became out of date (so more like Wikipedia entries
than blog posts). Images and other media would always have extensive metadata,
and ideally would be available in multiple formats for different purposes (print
versus web reproduction, playback at different resolutions, and so on).

## 3. Standards

- Information should be factually correct.

- People with disabilities should have access to the content where possible.

- Nothing should have been plagiarized.

- Contributors should always provide full and accurate authorship information.

- Text should conform to some specified standard for grammar and spelling.

- Translations of text into multiple languages should be encouraged.

- There should be no hate speech or defamatory content.

Nothing surprising here: the same kind of editorial standards that would apply
to an online journal. But by implication there has to be some kind of oversight
to see that the standards are met. Accessibility standards can be trivially easy
to satisfy in some cases, such as by providing textual descriptions of images
for blind people, but difficult to meet in others, for example in making sure
that videos with sound tracks are also properly captioned for the deaf. By
default, much of the content would be English-language based, but rather than
imposing an English-only requirement it would be good to have multilingual
content and translations to serve a global audience. Some major journals have no
explicit prohibitions on hate speech, but many online services do include them
in their terms of service.

## 4. Copyright and licensing

- Copyright should remain with the original copyright holders.

- Licensing should allow limited re-use of the content (a CC-by... license or
  equivalent).

Keeping the original copyright intact is important for encouraging people to
contribute, and having very clear copyright and licensing information is vital
for journalists and others wondering if they can re-use the content. Someone
would need to put a significant amount of work into sorting out the copyright
details, because often contributors will be unsure of these themselves. It would
be best to use one of the Creative Commons licenses
<https://creativecommons.org/share-your-work/licensing-types-examples/> wherever
possible, and always use licenses that permit anyone to re-use the content with
proper attribution to the original copyright holder. There's a definite downside
to this: there are attractive illustrations that could be used in web articles
if their re-use elsewhere was prohibited, but it would be a burden on the users
and maintainers to keep track of what was allowed and what was forbidden.

## 5. Editorial workflow

- Only editors should be authorized to add new visible content.

- Editors should review new contributions and require the contributor to make
  revisions when necessary.

- Editors should reject contributions that cannot meet the pre-defined content
  standards.

- It should be easy for contributors to submit unpublished material for editors
  to review, but not so easy that editors become overwhelmed.

- Editors who themselves contribute content should obtain approval from another
  independent editor before adding it.

So editors would have a much higher level of control than (for example) the
moderators of restricted email lists, but the editorial process would stop short
of the kind of full-scale peer review that an online journal would generally
require.

## 6. Privacy and user protection

- Users of the resources should not have to provide more than the usual minimum
  of personal information.

- User browsing histories and other tracking data should be retained for the
  minimum time necessary and not passed to third parties.

- Users should not be exposed to malware when using the resources.

These requirements would go beyond what the European Union's infamous General
Data Protection Regulation would require; in practice cookies might still be
needed to give web browser users a reasonable experience. The requirement to
shield users from malware implies tight controls on unauthorized users making
changes to the public content, and provisions preventing editors from
inadvertently adding malicious content. It would not be practically possible to
prevent web sites that were distributing malware or harvesting user data from
republishing content, but there would be ways to discourage sites trying to
maliciously imitate its original context.

## 7. Payment and advertising

- Anyone should be able to access content without payment.

- There should be one level of content (not a free level and a premium paid
  level).

- Advertising should not appear in or beside the content (except possibly for
  fundraising requests for the project itself).

An implication of this would be that newspapers and other re-publishers of
content would not have to pay any extra fees. Of course excluding fees and
advertising would mean that other sources would need to provide more funding for
the project, but there would be no way to include advertising and meet the other
requirements. However in practice it would be impossible to exclude advertising
from all places where content might be re-published.

## 8. Technical requirements

- Web (HTTPS) access to the content across the full range of desktop and mobile
  devices.

- Specific provisions for automated systems such as search engines and other
  consumers of semantically structured metadata.

- Access from anywhere on the Internet, ideally without imposing any additional
  speed penalties on particular countries.

- Avoidance of services known to be blocked in particular countries.

- An independently registered Internet domain name for the project.

- Use of well-known (and ideally free) software and services.

Online web browser access is of course an essential requirement, although it
should not be an exclusive one (for example there's a very good case for making
selective downloads to use offline, or for close integration with social media
apps). The reasons for preferring free over commercial software or services are
not just ideological: there are real risks of vendor lock-in, and of vendors
changing their terms of service at short notice. But there's also a requirement
not to use anything obscure or hand-crafted, where only one or two people
understand how a system works. Volunteers would almost certainly provide much of
the technical support, and a new volunteer should not be required to expend
effort coming up to speed on some obscure system. Having a distinct domain name
registered for the project would help in keeping it independent of particular
vendors or institutions (an important caveat is that the registration should
explicitly use the contact information for the project, to avoid a vendor or
consultant having unwanted control of it). There's no requirement that a single
traditional web server should provide everything, only that an end user would
have a reasonably unified experience without being aware of whatever mess of
caches, CDNs, load balancers, media servers, and database backends was involved
in delivering it. Similarly, contributors and editors should be able to
concentrate on their work without being distracted by technicalities, and
neither contributors nor editors should require any specialist technical
knowledge.

## 9. Governance

- No single individual, vendor or institution should control the project.

- There should be a code of ethics, explicitly inclusive when specifying the
  people involved in the project, and forbidding bribery or conflicts of
  interest.

- A board or steering committee should have ultimate responsibility for the
  project.

- A group of several editors should have responsibility for the day-to-day
  running of the project.

Throwing together some boilerplate code of conduct with the usual language about
wishing to be inclusive (of all genders, ethnicities, national origins,
religions, sexual orientations, and so on) would be easy. What would be hard
(but very important for the success of the project) would be recruiting a
reasonably large group of committed editors that _was_ diverse. Individuals die,
fall ill, or leave their jobs; vendors make huge increases to their pricing
structures or changes their terms of service; institutions shut down parts of
their IT infrastructure; a long-term Internet resource needs to be independent.
But dendrochronology is a relatively small field, so perhaps it is too much to
hope that a new completely independent organization would run it: compromises
might be if some existing bodies such as the Tree-Ring Society or the
Association for Tree-Ring Research would take it on as part of their activities;
however they could not be expected to fund it without substantial new donations,
or provide the necessary staffing and organization without many more volunteers.
